Hi I'm Tricia, an organic gardener. I grow organically for a healthy and safe
food supply,
for a clean and sustainable environment,
for an enjoyable and rewarding experience.
Mulch can be a gardeners best friend.
As defined by the Colorado State
University, mulch is any material that
provides protection
or improves the soil when applied to the
soil surface.
Mulches serve some important purposes in
the garden.
They regulate soil temperature,
suppress weeds,
improve soil structure, reduce surface
evaporation,
protects shallow rooted plants from frost heave and improves water penetration and air movement.
Compost is probably one of the most familiar mulching materials
and a lot of gardeners will put about an inch of
compost on top of the soil and then they'll add
other types of mulching materials as
well.
Compost can be used alone as a mulch but
there's a whole world of other mulching
materials available.
There are two types of mulches available:
organic, which is plant matter
and inorganic: such as plastics.
Today we are going to be focusing on mulching in the vegetable garden.
Inorganic mulches like plastic films
come in a variety of colors
and that's not for aesthetics.
Plants have favorite mulch colors
tomatoes, eggplants and strawberries
like red,
peppers favor reflective mulches.
Potatoes like the black mulching film.
Plastic mulches
should be laid down on top of any
irrigation lines
and normally will need to be replaced every
season.
The other category of mulches are
organic mulches.
These are materials that decompose
like straw, paper, bark, wood chips, grass
clippings, finished compost and more.
In addition to water conservation, soil temperature
regulation and weed
suppression
organic marches can actually help the soil
when they decompose and make organic
matter
as well as help prevent erosion.
One of the misconceptions about organic
mulches is that more is better and
that's not the case
you want to apply the organic mulches at the recommended depths and then
reapply as it decomposes.
Organic mulches should be laid down two to
three inches thick for fine materials
like compost or straw
and three to four inches deep for course
materials like bark or wood chips.
leave one to two inches of clear space
around stems and as much as six inches
of space from tree trunks.
this is because the moisture that the
marches hold
can cause rot around the stems and trunks.
Grass clippings can be a great mulching material
but make sure and put them down when
they're dry or they could prevent
water penetration also don't use any
grass clippings that been treated with an
herbicide.
High carbon mulches like bark, wood chips and
straw
work very well,
however,
as they decompose
they can pull nitrogen from the soil and
that can compete
for the plant's nutrients.
When you add a high carbon mulch during
the growing season
sprinkle a high nitrogen fertilizer
such as this Compost Maker from
E.B. Stone on top of the mulch
to provide a nitrogen source for
decomposition.
Mulching is good so mulch like you mean it and grow organic for life.